# Borel algebra and Lebesgue measure

Here we introduce the Borel $\sigma$-algebra, which is the $\sigma$-algebra generated by the open sets of a topological space. We also introduce the Lebesgue measure, an important measure on the Borel $\sigma$-algebra defined by $\mathbb{R}$, and prove it is well-defined and unique.

(pnm-borel-sig-alg)=
## Borel sigma algebra

We first introduce the Borel $\sigma$-algebra. Given a [topological space](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/TopologicalSpace.html) $E$, its Borel $\sigma$-algebra is the $\sigma$-algebra generated by the set of open subsets of $\sigma$-algebra.

<div class="definition">

**Definition (Borel $\sigma$-algebra and measure)** Let $E$ be a [topological space](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/TopologicalSpace.html). The $\sigma$-algebra generated by the open sets
    
$$ \mathcal{A} = \{A \subseteq E : A \text{ is open}\} $$

is called the Borel $\sigma$-algebra of $E$. We write $\mathcal{B}(E) = \sigma(\mathcal{A})$ and $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}) = \mathcal{B}$. A measure $\mu$ on $(E, \mathcal{B}(E))$ is called a Borel measure. If $\mu(K) < \infty$ for all [compact subsets](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/CompactSpace.html) $K \subseteq E$, then $\mu$ is called a Radon measure.

</div>
<br>

## Uniqueness of the Lebesgue measure

Of key importance to measure theory is the Borel measure $\mu$ on $\mathbb{R}$ that assigns to each interval its length:

$$ \mu ((a, b)) = b - a. $$

The following theorem by Lebesgue shows that this $\mu$ exists and is unique.

<div class="theorem">

**Theorem (Lebesgue)** There exists a unique Borel measure on $\mathbb{R}$, i.e. a measure on $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$, such that
    
$$ \mu ((a, b)) = b - a. $$
    
</div>
<br>

To prove the uniqueness of the Lebesgue measure, we will use the following lemma.

<div class="lemma">

**Lemma (Equivalent condition for countable additivity)** A finite valued additive set function $\mu$ on a ring $\mathcal{A}$ is countably additive if and only if for any $A_n \downarrow$ sequence in $\mathcal{A}$ such that $\bigcap_n A_n = \emptyset$ we have $\mu(A_n) \to 0$.
    
</div>
<br>

<details class="proof">
<summary>Proof: Equivalent condition for countable additivity</summary>

Let $\mu$ be a countably additive and finite valued set function on the ring $\mathcal{A}$. Suppose that $A_n \downarrow$ is sequence in $\mathcal{A}$ such that $\bigcup_n A_n = \emptyset$. Then, defining $B_n = A_n \setminus A_{n + 1}$ we have

$$ \mu\left(\bigcup_{n = 1}^N B_n\right) = \mu(A_1) - \mu(A_{N + 1}). $$
    
Taking the limit to infinity and the using countable additivity of $\mu$ we have

$$ \lim_{N \to \infty} \mu\left(\bigcup_{n = 1}^N B_n\right) = \mu\left(\bigcup_{n = 1}^\infty B_n\right) = \mu(A_1) = \mu(A_1) - \lim_{N \to \infty} \mu(A_{N + 1}), $$
    
and therefore
    
$$ \lim_{N \to \infty} \mu(A_{N + 1}) = 0.$$
    
Going the other way, suppose that $\mu$ is a (finitely) additive and finite valued set function on the ring $\mathcal{A}$, and also that
for any $A_n \downarrow$ sequence in $\mathcal{A}$ such that $\bigcap_n A_n = \emptyset$ we have $\mu(A_n) \to 0$. Let $B_n$
be a sequence in $\mathcal{A}$ and suppose sthat $B = \cup_n B_n$ is also in $\mathcal{A}$. Now define the decreasing sequence
    
$$ A_N = B \setminus \bigcup_{n = 1}^N B_n, $$

and observe that $\bigcap_n A_n = \emptyset$. Then we have
    
$$ \mu\left(B\right) = \mu\left(B \setminus \bigcup_{n = 1}^N B_n \right) + \mu\left(\bigcup_{n = 1}^N B_n\right), $$
    
and taking the limit of $N \to \infty$ we arrive at
    
$$ \mu\left(\bigcup_{n = 1}^\infty B_n\right) = \lim_{N \to \infty} \mu\left(\bigcup_{n = 1}^N B_n\right) = \lim_{N \to \infty} \sum_{n = 1}^N \mu\left(B_n\right), $$
    
</details>
<br>
   
We can now prove Lebesgue's theorem in two parts, one showing the existence of $\mu$ and the other showing its uniqueness

<details class="proof">
<summary>Proof: \(\mu\) exists</summary>

Let $\mathcal{A}$ be ring of all finite unions of disjoint intervals of the form
    
$$ A = (a_1, b_1] \cup (a_2, b_2] \cup ... \cup (a_n, b_n]. $$
    
This ring generates $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$. For such $A \in \mathcal{A}$ define a set function
    
$$ \mu(A) = \sum^N_{n = 1} (b_n - a_n). $$
    
First we will confirm that $\mu$ is a well defined function, in the sense that it takes a unique value for given $A$. Suppose $A$ can be written as two distinct unions of disjoint intervals
    
$$ A = \bigcup_n C_n = \bigcup_n D_n. $$
    
Then we can write
    
$$\begin{align}
\mu\left(\bigcup_n C_n\right) &= \mu\left(\bigcup_n \left(C_n \cap \bigcup_m D_m \right)\right) = \mu\left(\bigcup_{nm} C_n \cap D_m \right) \\
    &= \mu\left(\bigcup_m \left(D_m \cap \bigcup_n C_n \right)\right) = \mu\left(\bigcup_m D_m\right).
\end{align}$$
    
Now we show that $\mu$ is in fact a {ref}`measure<pnm-sigalg-meas>`. First, $\mu(\emptyset) = 0$ by the definition of set functions. Second we need to show that $\mu$ is countably additive. By the lemma stated above, we can equivalently show that for any sequence $A_n \downarrow$ in $\mathcal{A}$ such that $\bigcap_n A_n = \emptyset$ we have $\mu(A_n) \to 0$.
    
We argue by contradiction. Suppose that there exists $A_n \downarrow$ in $\mathcal{A}$ such that $\bigcap_n A_n = \emptyset$ but $\mu(A_n) \not \to 0$. Then there exists a strictly increasing integer sequence $N_n$ such that
    
$$\mu(A_{N_n}) \geq 2 \epsilon \text{ for some } \epsilon > 0.$$
    
Since each $A_n$ is in $\mathcal{A}$, it can be written as a finite union
    
$$ A_n = \bigcup_{m = 1}^{M_n} (a_m, b_m]. $$
    
Now consider the sequence $B_n$ given by
    
$$ B_n = \bigcup_{m = 1}^{M_n} \left(a_m + \epsilon \frac{2^{-n}}{M_n}, b_m\right]. $$
    
We can write
    
$$\begin{align}
\mu\left( A_N \setminus \bigcap_{n = 1}^N B_n \right) &\leq \mu \left( \bigcup_{n = 1}^N A_N \setminus B_n \right) \\
&\leq \sum_{n = 1}^N  \mu (A_N \setminus B_n) \\
&\leq \epsilon \sum_{n = 1}^N 2^{-n} \\
&\leq \epsilon.
\end{align}$$
    
Therefore the set $\bigcap_{n = 1}^N B_n$ must have measure at least $\epsilon$ and therefore is non-empty. Denoting the closure of a set with a bar, the set $K_N = \bigcap_{n = 1}^N \bar{B}_n$ is also non empty. But $K_n$ is a sequence of compact sets and therefore
    
$$ \emptyset \neq \bigcap_n K_n \subseteq \bigcap_n A_n = \emptyset, $$
    
reaching a contradiction. Therefore it must be that $\mu(A_n) \to 0$ and using the lemma above it follows that $\mu$ is countably additive. Therefore $\mu$ is a measure.

</details>
<br>
    
We can now finish the proof off by showing that $\mu$ is the unique measure satisfying the definition above. We will appeal to the {ref}`uniqueness theorem<pnm-uniqueness>`, however we need to make a little additional effort because $\mu$ can be infinite, whereas the uniqueness theorem applies to finite measures.

<details class="proof">
<summary>Proof: \(\mu\) is unique</summary>

Consider the ring $\mathcal{A}$ as defined in the preceeding proof. Let $\lambda$ be any other measure on $\mathcal{B}$ such that $\lambda ((a, b]) = b - a$. For any $n \mathcal{N}$, consider the new measures
    
$$ \mu_n(A) = \mu(A \cap (n, n + 1]) \text{ and } \lambda_n(A) = \lambda(A \cap (n, n + 1]) $$
    
which are finite measures that coincide on $\mathcal{A}$. $\mathcal{A}$ is a $\pi$ system so by the {ref}`uniqueness theorem<pnm-uniqueness>` $\mu_n = \lambda_n$ on $\mathcal{B}$. But then for any $A \in \mathcal{B}$ we have
    
$$\begin{align}
\mu(A) &= \mu\left(\bigcup_{n \in \mathbb{Z}} A \cap (n, n + 1]\right) = \sum_{n \in \mathbb{Z}} \mu_n (A) \\
       &= \sum_{n \in \mathbb{Z}} \lambda_n (A) = \lambda\left(\bigcup_{n \in \mathbb{Z}} A \cap (n, n + 1]\right) = \lambda(A)
\end{align}$$
    
where we have used the fact that $\mu_n$ and $\lambda_n$ are countably additive, which was shown in the last proof. Therefore $\mu = \lambda$ on all of $\mathcal{B}$.

</details>
<br>