# Introductory definitions

The first lecture introduces the central definitions of $\sigma$-algebras and measures and discusses some properties which follow from their definitions. It also introduces measure spaces, rings, algebras and set functions. Caratheodory's extension theorem is stated here, and proved in the following lecture.

## Sigma algebras

<div class="definition">

**Definition ($\sigma$-algebra)** A $\sigma$-algebra $\mathcal{E}$ on $E$ is a family of subsets of $E$ such that
    
1. It contains the empty set $\emptyset \in \mathcal{E}$.
2. Complements of its elements are also in the family $A \in \mathcal{E} \implies A^C \in \mathcal{E}$.
3. Countable unions of its elements are also in the family $A_n \in \mathcal{E} \implies \bigcup_{n = 1}^\infty A \in \mathcal{E}$.
    
</div>
<br>

<div class="lemma">

**Corollary ($\sigma$-algebra corollaries)** A $\sigma$-algebra $\mathcal{E}$ on $E$ contains the set $E$ and is closed under countable intersections
    
$$A_n \in \mathcal{E} \implies \bigcap_{n = 1}^\infty A_n \in \mathcal{E}.$$
    
</div>
<br>

<details class="proof">
<summary>Proof: \(\sigma\)-algebra corollaries</summary>

Since $\emptyset \in \mathcal{E}$, we have $\emptyset^C = E \in \mathcal{E}$. Also if $A_n \in \mathcal{E}$ then $A_n^C \in \mathcal{E}$ and also
    
$$B = \bigcup_{n = 1}^\infty A_n^C \in \mathcal{E}.$$
    
Since $B \in \mathcal{E}$ also $B^C \in \mathcal{E}$ so
    
$$B^C = \bigcap_{n = 1}^\infty A_n \in \mathcal{E}.$$

</details>
<br>

Now we can define measures, which are the subject of study of this whole course. Informally, measures are functions that take sets and return their sizes. For a consistent notion of size, we require that the measure of the empty set is zero and that measures are non-negative and countably additive.

<div class="definition">

**Definition (Measure)** A measure $\mu$ on $(E, \mathcal{E})$ is a non-negative set function $\mu : \mathcal{E} \to [0, \infty]$ such that

1. The measure of the empty set is $0$, $\mu(\emptyset) = 0$.
2. It is countably additive, meaning that for any $A_n \in \mathcal{E}$ such that $A_n \cap A_m = \emptyset$ \begin{align} \mu\left(\bigcup_{n = 1}^\infty A_n \right) = \sum_{n = 1}^\infty \mu(A_n). \end{align}
    
We call the triplet $(E, \mathcal{E}, \mu)$ a measurable space.
    
</div>
<br>


<div class="observation">

**Remark (Measures on countable sets)** When $E$ is couuntable, any measure on $\mathcal{E} = \mathcal{P}(E)$ (where $\mathcal{P}(\cdot)$ is the set of all subsets, or powerset) necessarily satisfies

\begin{align}
\mu(A) = \mu\left( \bigcup_{x \in A} \{x\} \right) = \sum_{x \in A} \mu(\{x\}), \text{ for all } A \subseteq E,
\end{align}

so $\mu$ corresponds to a mass function $m : E \to [0, \infty]$

\begin{align}
m(x) = \mu(\{x\}), x \in E.
\end{align}

</div>
<br>

When $E$ is not countable, we will generally need to work with $\mathcal{E}$ smaller than $\mathcal{P}(E)$.


<div class="definition">

**Definition ($\sigma$-algebra generated by $\mathcal{A}$)** Given a family $\mathcal{A}$ of subsets of $E$, we define the set $\sigma(A)$ as

$$ \sigma(\mathcal{A}) = \{A \subseteq E : A \in \mathcal{E}~\forall~\sigma\text{-algebras } \mathcal{E} \text{ that contain } \mathcal{A}\}.$$

</div>
<br>


<div class="lemma">

**Corollary ($\sigma(\mathcal{A})$ $=$ smallest $\sigma$-algebra containg $\mathcal{A}$)** It is the case that

\begin{align}
\sigma(\mathcal{A}) = \bigcap_{\mathcal{E}~\sigma\text{-algebra } \supseteq \mathcal{A}} \mathcal{E},
\end{align}

and that $\sigma(A)$ is itself a $\sigma$-algebra.
    
</div>
<br>

<details class="proof">
<summary>Proof: \(\sigma(\mathcal{A})\) \(=\) smallest \(\sigma\)-algebra containg \(\mathcal{A}\) </summary>

Suppose $A \in \sigma(\mathcal{A})$. Then $A \in \mathcal{E}$ for any $\sigma$-algebra that contains $\mathcal{A}$ and so

\begin{align}
A \in \bigcap_{\mathcal{E}~\sigma\text{-algebra } \supseteq \mathcal{A}} \mathcal{E}.
\end{align}

Going the other way, if we start from

\begin{align}
A \in \bigcap_{\mathcal{E}~\sigma\text{-algebra } \supseteq \mathcal{A}} \mathcal{E},
\end{align}

then also $\sigma(A)$, arriving at the first part of the result. Now we also clearly have $\emptyset \in \sigma(\mathcal{A})$. Suppose $B, A_n \in \sigma(\mathcal{A})$. First, since $B \in \mathcal{E}$ for all $\mathcal{E}$ that contain $\mathcal{A}$, we also have $B^C \in \mathcal{E}$ for all such $\mathcal{E}$, from which it follows $B^C \in \sigma(\mathcal{A})$. Similarly, we also have

$$ A = \bigcup_{n = 1}^\infty A_n \in \mathcal{E} $$

for all $\mathcal{E}$ that contain $\mathcal{A}$ so $A \in \sigma(\mathcal{A})$, concluding that $\sigma(\mathcal{A})$ is a $\sigma$-algebra.

</details>
<br>

## Rings and algebras

Two useful definitions are rings and algebras. These are simpler objects than $\sigma$-algebras and so are easier to work with in practice.

<div class="definition">

**Definition (Ring)** $\mathcal{A}$ is a ring of subsets of $E$ if

1. It contains the empty set $\emptyset \in \mathcal{A}$.
2. It is closed under unions and differences $A, B \in \mathcal{A} \implies A \cup B \in \mathcal{A}$ and $B \setminus A \in \mathcal{A}$.

It is a direct corollary of this definition that $A, B \in \mathcal{A} \implies A \int B \in \mathcal{A}$.

</div>
<br>

If a ring contains the universe set $E$, it is also an algebra - defined below.


<div class="definition">

**Definition (Algebra)** $\mathcal{A}$ is an algebra of subsets of $E$ if

1. It contains the empty set $\emptyset \in \mathcal{A}$.
2. It is closed under unions and complements $A, B \in \mathcal{A} \implies A \cup B \in \mathcal{A}$ and $A^C \in \mathcal{A}$.

</div>
<br>

(pnm-l1-setfunc)=
## Set functions

We also introduce set functions, which are much like measures, but more general since we do not define them on $\sigma$-algebras and do not impose several of the conditions we imposed for measures.

<div class="definition">

**Definition (Set functions)** For $\mathcal{A} \subseteq \mathcal{P}(E)$ such that $\emptyset \in \mathcal{A}$, we say that $\mu$ is a set function if

$$ \mu : \mathcal{A} \to [0, \infty],~\mu(\emptyset) = 0.$$

Further, we sey that $\mu$ is

1. Increasing if $\forall A, B \in \mathcal{A}$, such that $A \subseteq B$ \begin{align} \mu(A) \leq \mu(B). \end{align}
2. Additive if $\forall A, B \in \mathcal{A}$ such that $A \cup B = \emptyset$ and $A \cup B \in \mathcal{A}$ we have \begin{align} \mu(A \cup B) = \mu(A) + \mu(B). \end{align}
3. Countably additive if $\forall A_n \in \mathcal{A}$ such that $A_i \cap A_j = \emptyset$ and $\bigcup_{n = 1}^\infty A_n \in \mathcal{A}$ we have \begin{align} \mu\left( \bigcup_{n = 1}^\infty A_n \right) =  \sum_{n = 1}^\infty \mu\left(A_n \right).\end{align}
4. Countably sub-additive if $\forall A_n \in \mathcal{A}$ such that $\bigcup_{n = 1}^\infty A_n \in \mathcal{A}$ we have \begin{align} \mu\left( \bigcup_{n = 1}^\infty A_n \right) \leq \sum_{n = 1}^\infty \mu\left(A_n \right).\end{align}
    
</div>
<br>


## Caratheodory's theorem

One useful theorem that will be used throughout the rest of the course is Caratheodory's extension theorem.

<div class="theorem">

**Theorem (Caratheodory's extension theorem)** Let $\mathcal{A} \subseteq \mathcal{P}(E)$ be a ring of subsets of $E$ and let $\mu : \mathcal{A} \to [0, \infty]$ be a countably additive set function. Then $\mu$ can be extended to a measure on $\sigma(\mathcal{A})$.

</div>
<br>

This theorem is useful because, when trying to construct appropriate measures, it allows us to search for countably additive set functions on rings instead of $\sigma$-algebras. Once we find such a function, we can appeal to this theorem to show that a measure exists on $\sigma(\mathcal{A})$. Typically, it is easier to work with rings than $\sigma$-algebras, hence the value of this theorem. Caratheodory extension theorem is proved in the next lecture.